Let's start coding now.
And at this point, what you'll need to
do in order to follow along with me,
there's not gonna be any code pens.
Because of course,
code pen will only allow us to type in
that little CSS window that's there.
So what we're going to do instead
is we're gonna switch to VSCode.
Inside of the website for
the course, you will find a link to
the GitHub repo where you can download the
files that we're about to work with and
I'm gonna work on them in VSCode.
You are welcome to use any editor
that you want, but by using VSCode,
we'll have access to more ways of
including styles inside of our document.
Now that you have a sense of how
the cascade works, let's do a demo and
see how we can get it to
work here inside of VSCode.
So if you open up the two files that we'll
be working with, which are index.html and
take a look at style.css, there's a couple
of other files that are in there,
you can ignore those for right now.
We're just gonna look at index.html and
style.css.
You can see that these
are linked together and
I am going to just scroll
to the bottom of my CSS.
And I'm going to start here,
in this particular demo.
Let's say that I have a paragraph, and
I want to put a border
around these paragraphs and
we'll say it's 2px solid red.
Save my style sheet, and if I take a look
at this inside of my browser window,
shockingly, I will wind up with
borders around all of my paragraphs,
nothing new there.
Let us take a look at other
ways though that we can
include this same type of
styling inside of our CSS.
Remember, border of course,
is a property that does not inherit,
that's why we're gonna work with that
here, in this particular example.
So this is the external style sheet.
And if you take a look at the head
of this document right now,
we have our style sheet is
linked here on line number 8,
that's our link to our
external style sheet.
After that, we have an embedded style or
also called an internal style.
What goes in between the style tax?
So if I were to go here and say paragraph,
border 2px dotted blue,
what color would the borders be
around my paragraph at this
point in time and why?
Blue blue blue,
everybody thinks blue, okay.
And if we refresh the page,
sure enough you're all right dotted
blue borders around all the paragraphs.
Why?
They have exactly the same specificity,
right, we have just
the type selector here and
it happens to be that my embedded
style comes after my link style.
What would happen if I took this
line 8 with my link style and
I move it after this embedded style here?
What color are my borders now?
Red or blue?
>> Dotted blue?
Okay, dotted blue.
>> One person said red.
>> One person said red,
one person said dotted blue.
They are going to be red, okay?
And this is because my
linked style comes later in
the document than my embedded style.
I believe it was an older
rule a long time ago,
where the embedded styles always
took priority over the link styles.
But the way it works now is that whatever
comes later is the one that wins,
where the specificity is the same.
Of course, we can always amp up
the specificity along the way.
So now that my link style is
coming after my embedded style,
do I have a paragraph with a class on it?
I don't.
So let's just say I wanna
take this first paragraph and
put a different border on it.
We can do that here,
inside of my linked style sheet.
We could put this even earlier,
let's say, it's p:first-of-type.
And let's say it has
a border of 4px dashed,
double, one of my favorite border types,
double black.
In fact, we'll make it a little bit
bigger so you can appreciate the beauty.
So the first paragraph, the first-of-type
will have a 10px double border,
whereas all the rest of the paragraphs
may have either a red border or
a blue border depending on
what the order happens to be.
So if we save this,
how is our first paragraph going to look?
If we refresh the page, we have something
interesting going on here, and why?
They actually have two paragraphs,
looks like the first and
the last paragraph wind up with
the double black border on it.
And that may be a little bit confusing,
until you take a look at your HTML.
In the footer, we have a paragraph and
it is also the first-of-type
inside of the footer.
We haven't been specific and
said, article p:first-of-type,
we just said all paragraphs that
are the first of their type.
And so therefore, we've selected
the paragraph in the footer.
In addition to selecting the paragraph,
that's the first one in the article.
It will override the red border and
so forth and
that is because its specificity is higher,
right?
First-of-type is a pseudo class,
paragraph is an HTML element.
So our specificity for
this selector is 011,
whereas the paragraph has
a specificity of 001.
And so even though it's coming earlier
in our external style sheet, the greater
specificity is going to win out over
some of these styles that come later.
And that is why the paragraph
border looks different here.
Now, what if we start to get even crazier?
So here in line in our paragraph,
I add to this, a style,
Border, in fact, let's
just do the border-bottom
of 3px dashed orange.
So now, I have an inline style here for
my first paragraph,
how is that paragraph's
border going to look now?
Think about that for a moment.
When we refresh the page, you'll see
that we have a dotted orange border
on the bottom, whereas the rest of
the border is that black double border.
Why is that?
Well, remember the border, the property
border by itself is shorthand.
It includes all four sides of the box,
whatever box you're working with.
As you spell out in your values,
it includes the size and
the color and
the style of that particular border.
So we have overwritten just the bottom
border with what we put in line.
Because in line, it's going to be anything
that comes elsewhere in the document
even if the specificity, we're just got
it right there in the paragraph is lower.
But the left, right, and top portions
of that border are still gonna
take their styling from
that p:first-of-type.
And of course,
this only affects the first paragraph,
because that's where we put it in line.
And so now, we have that dashed
border there underneath.
Okay, and then of course,
the last part of this is starting
to throw in your bang important.
And my sense about bang important has
always been, people put these in,
because they don't understand
what's going on in the cascade.
They don't understand what's
going on with specificity,
they don't understand what's
going on with inheritance.
Someone told them somewhere along the way,
just throw in a bang important and
maybe that will help.
And they've done it a couple of times and
it helps sometimes.
And then it quote doesn't work
other times and they just get very,
very confused by it.
So my recommendation to you is as follows.
I strongly recommend not using it,
just don't use it,
because then you wind up with styles
that are far more predictable.
We don't go to the mirror
universe of the important styles,
we're gonna stay right where
we are with the normal styles.
And you usually have enough depth
that you don't need bang important to
override things.
I think in my career, I've only had to
use bang important a handful of times.
It was inevitably in a situation where I
was working with really crappy code that
came from a WordPress developer
somewhere along the way.
And they've already put bang
important somewhere and so
this was the only way that I could
override what they had done.
So let's take a look at how
this might wind up working out.
So we're now in this
style up here at the top,
we have an inline style that says
the border bottom is 3px dashed orange.
What I'm gonna do now is
after my p:first-of-type,
I'm gonna add a bang important.
Okay, so now that p:first-of-type is
going to have a four sided
black double border,
but in line,
we have an orange dashed border.
What is the border going to look like
around that first paragraph that's
there on the page?
Is it going to have a black
double border on all four sides?
Or is it gonna have a black
double border on three sides and
an orange dashed border on the fourth?
And then we can take a look and
see what happens.
And when we refresh,
you'll see that that bang important in
the external style sheet is overriding
the inline style that we have.
So this is one of the useful
things that you can do,
if you are working in
an environment like WordPress,
Squarespace, Wix,
some of these other various site editors.
Where you may have that big box that
just says Custom CSS here, but you don't
have access to the HTML, you have to have
access to HTML to do an inline style.
But when you have an external style sheet,
and you're trying to override an inline
style, bang important is the way that
you're gonna wind up having to do that.
So that would be the use case for that.
If you are custom coding
your applications,
you have access to all of the HTML and
the CSS.
Honestly, there truly is no reason
to be using bang important, okay?
It winds up being a useful thing only if
you're working with other people's code
and you don't have full access to it.
That is my opinion for
how bang important should be used.